---
kernelspec:
  name: python3
  display_name: 'Python 3'
---

# Analyses

An analysis Python module in `ilamb3` is a function that ingests both a model & benchmarking dataset, performs a mathematical operation between the two, and outputs a dataframe with results that can be used to produce plot visualizations, which can be displayed in your benchmarking study's HTML dashboard.

An analysis can be **generalized**, or it can be **specialized** to ingest particular variables, regions, product types (gridded and/or point), or dimensions (time, space, etc.). ILAMB employs both. For example, the [bias](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/analysis/bias.py) and [rmse](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/analysis/rmse.py) functions are generalized and can be applied to all incoming datasets, while the [runoff sensitivity](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/analysis/runoff_sensitivity.py) and [nbp](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/analysis/nbp.py) functions are specialized and require specific variables. Further, functions can be **simple** or **robust**. A **simple** function is prone to breakage, while a **robust** function contains logic that handles various input data and edge cases. The process of writing an analysis function follows a natural progression:

1. Write a **simple** analysis function that performs the mathematical operation you want to implement
2. Test the function on a variety of datasets to esnure it works before making it more robust
2. Enhance the analysis function to be more **robust**
3. Integrate the analysis function into `ilamb3`
4. Demonstrate how to use the analysis function in an `ilamb3` benchmarking study

## Before you start

Before getting started, you should (1) clone the ilamb3 software from the GitHub repository and set up the environment in development mode, and (2) have in mind an analysis objective that does not already exist in `ilamb3`. For this tutorial, our objective is to write an analysis function that returns the absolute relative error between a variable in the [reference](#vocab) and [comparison](#vocab) datasets. 

$$\varepsilon = \frac{|v_{\mathrm{ref}} - v_{\mathrm{com}}|}{|v_{\mathrm{ref}}|}.$$

## Write a simple analysis function

Analysis functions most often follow a general prototype:

```python
def my_analysis_func(
    reference: xr.Dataset,
    comparison: xr.Dataset
) -> tuple[pd.DataFrame, xr.Dataset, xr.Dataset]:
```

The analysis function should:

- Ingest two `xr.Dataset` objects as inputs, one as a [reference](#vocab) and another as a [comparison](#vocab).
- Return a `pd.DataFrame` that will contain any [scalars](#vocab) or [scores](#vocab) generated by the analysis. The dataframe can have as many rows/scalars as you like, but the `ilamb3` system will expect specific columns, which we will explain below.
- Return two `xr.Dataset` objects that will contain any intermediate datasets with information that you wish to plot. If your analysis does not have such datasets, you can return empty `xr.Dataset` objects.

Below is a simple implementation of our absolute relative error analysis function that follows this prototype. We will later learn how to generalize this function to be more flexible and robust.

```{code-cell} python
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import xarray as xr

def absrelerr(reference: xr.Dataset, comparison: xr.Dataset, varname: str) -> tuple[pd.DataFrame, xr.Dataset, xr.Dataset]:

    # calculate mean absolute relative error
    epsilon = (np.abs(reference[varname] - comparison[varname]) / np.abs(reference[varname])).mean()

    # build the output dataframe
    df = pd.DataFrame(
        [
            {
                "source": "Comparison",
                "region": "None",
                "analysis": "Relative Error",
                "name": "Mean Absolute Relative Error",
                "type": "scalar",
                "units": "1",
                "value": float(epsilon),
            }
        ]
    )

    return df, xr.Dataset(), xr.Dataset()
```

We added a keyword argument, `varname`, to specify the variable on which to perform the analysis. If the user doesn't provide a variable name, this particular function would not work. Next, we calculated the absolute relative error on that variable. Then, we built a pd.DataFrame that contains information that ILAMB requires. The dataframe should have the following columns:

- `source`: The data source that the scalar is referencing: either the `Reference` dataset or the `Comparison` dataset. If your scalar is representative of both datasets, you should choose `Comparison` as the `source`, because inherently the scalar is meant to evaluate the performance of the comparison dataset against the reference dataset (usually the Model against the observations).
- `region`: The region label over which the scalar applies. In general, `ilamb3` analyses can be performed over multiple regions. For now, we will set this as `None` to indicate no region is specified.
- `analysis`: The name of the analysis. There can be multiple scalars per analysis, but this column should be the same for all scalars that belong to the same analysis. In this case, we call it `Relative Error`.
- `name`: The name of the scalar generated for this analysis. The name should be descriptive, such as `Mean Absolute Relative Error`, because it will appear in the scalars table displayed in the `ilamb3` dataset pages.
- `type`: The type of scalar being reported, either `scalar` or `score`.
    - A `scalar` is any statistic you compute; they could represent errors, deviations, means, etc. It can be any value that you think is important to report, and it can be in any units. They will be displayed in the scalars table on the dataset pages.
    - A `score` is a synthesis of certain scalars to make it easier to compare performance across models and datasets. If you provide scores, ILAMB will use them to produce an additional "Overall Score."
- `units`: The units of the scalar, which in this case is dimensionless.
- `value`: The value of the scalar.

## Test the simple analysis function

In order to test the function, we generate synthetic reference and comparison datasets using a function from our testing suite. You may have data available on your machine that you would like to use for testing instead, but creating a synthetic dataset on-the-fly allows for reproducibility across different machines.

```{code-cell} python
from ilamb3.tests.test_run import generate_test_dset

reference = generate_test_dset(nyear=2, nlat=10, nlon=20, name="tas", unit="degC")
comparison = generate_test_dset(nyear=2, nlat=10, nlon=20, name="tas", unit="degC", seed=2)

df, _, _ = absrelerr(reference, comparison, "tas")
df
```

The returned dataframe contains a single row with the relative error between the reference and comparison datasets. The value may seem high, but our test data is coarse and random, so this is to be expected.

## Enhance the analysis function to be more robust

You may have already noticed some potential points of failure in this function. For example, by subtracting `comparison[varname]` from `reference[varname]`, we assume that the input datasets are indexed identically. In practice, the reference and comparison datasets are not structured the same. Here are differences we often see:

1. Both datasets contain a `time` dimension but use different calendars.
2. The temporal coverage of each dataset is different. For example, it is not meaningful to report relative error between observations that start in 1980's and model data that start in the 1850's.
3. The datasets are in different units.
4. The datasets may both be gridded but call their latitude and longitude dimensions different names (i.e. `lon` versus `longitude` or `Longitude`).
5. Both datasets are global, but their grids (i.e., latitude and longitude values) do not align with each other. Even if they are off by a tiny margin, `xarray` will treat them as different and yield `nan` results.

You may anticipate many other potential weak points in the code. However, `ilamb3` provides some functions that we can use to handle such issues. Primarily, you can find these functions inside two `ilamb3` package modules:

- `ilamb3.dataset` contains functions that operate on a single dataset.
- `ilamb3.compare` contains functions which embed logic for comparing two or more datasets.

To use these functions, import them from the `ilamb3` package:

```python
import ilamb3.compare as cmp
import ilamb3.dataset as dset
```

Below, we incorporate 5 one-liner functions from these modules to make the analysis function more **robust** to errors or unexpected behavior. The functions we incorporated tackle the 5 issues we listed above, plus some additional pitfalls from our **simple** function.

```python
# drop non-overlapping time and ensure units/coords are aligned
ref, com = cmp.make_comparable(reference, comparison, varname)

# ensure a time dimension exists 
if dset.is_temporal(ref[varname]):
    # handle possible calendar mismatch by calculating integrated time means
    ref[varname] = dset.integrate_time(ref, varname, mean=True)
if dset.is_temporal(com[varname]):
    com[varname] = dset.integrate_time(com, varname, mean=True)

# nest the spatial grids as explained in Collier, et al., JAMES, 2018
ref, com = cmp.nest_spatial_grids(ref, com)

# compute epsilon per gridcell
eps_gridded = np.abs(ref[varname] - com[varname]) / np.abs(ref[varname])

# compute an area-weighted mean of the per-gridcell epsilon values
epsilon = dset.integrate_space(eps_gridded, varname, mean=True)
```

- `make_comparable` is a catch-all comparison function that we use in many of our analysis functions. It removes non-overlapping time periods from the datasets, ensures matching units, ensures matching longitude intervals (either [-180, 180] or [0, 360]), as well as other things.
- `is_temporal` returns True if the time dimension is present while handling variations in the name of the time dimension (i.e. `time` vs `Time`) between datasets.
- `integrate_time` integrates away the time dimension by taking a mean. This circumvents the need to handle calendar differences. By taking this mean, we imply that we are less interested in any temporal differences, which should be noted in the docstring of our new analysis routine.
- `nest_spatial_grids` spatially aligns the datasets using the methodology outlines in [*Collier, et al. 2018*](https://doi.org/10.1029/2018MS001354) to handle potential resolution differences. You could also opt to interpolate the grids to a common resolution.
- `integrate_space` with `mean=True` returns the area-weighted mean of per-gridcell epsilon values. Now we have both a spatial version called `eps_gridded` that we can use to plot spatial maps, as well as a scalar version called `epsilon` that we can report in the dataframe. This is an example of how you can return intermediate datasets to be plotted, as well as scalars to be reported in the dataframe.

Our additions have introduced one more potential bug: we integrate over space, but what if one or both of the datasets are site collections, rather than gridded (e.g., the Fluxnet collection). While we could add logic to the function that handles point data, let's rather restrict this function to only work on gridded datasets. The **robust** analysis routine should detect and flag when a method isn't appropriate for the input data and raise an error called `ilamb3.exceptions.AnalysisNotAppropriate`. Let's add the following lines to the top of the function:

```python
if dset.is_site(reference[varname]) or dset.is_site(comparison[varname]):
    raise AnalysisNotAppropriate()
```

Expand the cell below to see all the changes we have made thus far. The difficult part of writing an analysis function is now complete. We have a function that performs the mathematical operation we want, and it is robust to various input data issues. The next step is to integrate this function into `ilamb3` so that it can be used in benchmarking studies.

```{code-cell} python
:tag: [hide-cell]
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import xarray as xr

import ilamb3.compare as cmp
import ilamb3.dataset as dset
from ilamb3.exceptions import AnalysisNotAppropriate

def absrelerr(
    reference: xr.Dataset, comparison: xr.Dataset, varname: str
) -> tuple[pd.DataFrame, xr.Dataset, xr.Dataset]:

    # limit analysis to gridded data only
    if dset.is_site(reference[varname]) or dset.is_site(comparison[varname]):
        raise AnalysisNotAppropriate()

    # drop non-overlapping time and ensure units/coords are aligned
    ref, com = cmp.make_comparable(reference, comparison, varname)

    # ensure a time dimension exists 
    if dset.is_temporal(ref[varname]):
        # handle possible calendar mismatch by calculating integrated time means
        ref[varname] = dset.integrate_time(ref, varname, mean=True)
    if dset.is_temporal(com[varname]):
        com[varname] = dset.integrate_time(com, varname, mean=True)

    # nest the spatial grids as explained in Collier, et al., JAMES, 2018
    ref, com = cmp.nest_spatial_grids(ref, com)

    # compute epsilon per gridcell
    eps_spatial = np.abs(ref[varname] - com[varname]) / np.abs(ref[varname])

    # compute an area-weighted mean of the per-gridcell epsilon values
    epsilon = dset.integrate_space(eps_spatial, varname, mean=True)

    # build up the output dataframe
    df = pd.DataFrame(
        [
            {
                "source": "Comparison",
                "region": "None",
                "analysis": "Relative Error",
                "name": "Mean Absolute Relative Error",
                "type": "scalar",
                "units": "1",
                "value": float(epsilon),
            }
        ]
    )

    return df, xr.Dataset(), xr.Dataset()
```

## Integrating into `ilamb3`

To use this function in `ilamb3`, it must be incorporated into a Python `class` that follows a specific template. This is because of two main reasons:

1. `ilamb3` needs to know beforehand what data will be used for the analysis. Our particular analysis needs to communicate that `varname` must be provided in order to execute.
2. To call analyses consistently in `ilamb3`, they should always have the same signature, i.e., requiring a reference and comparison dataset. But this does not leave room for extra parameters that may be important, like `varname`, so we need to move it elsewhere.

To this end, analyses are not merely functions, but rather an [abstract base class](https://docs.python.org/3/library/abc.html) (ABC), which we call an [ILAMBAnalysis](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/b32815578969cc8d4c7f6a6f58b0beed3b2c6574/ilamb3/analysis/base.py#L16). Lets change the function we wrote above into an `ILAMBAnalysis` and see how it works. If you are unfamiliar with classes in python, review this introductory [tutorial](https://realpython.com/python-classes/).

```{code-cell} python
:linenos:
:emphasize-lines: 7,12-17,22
import numpy as np
import pandas as pd
import xarray as xr

import ilamb3.compare as cmp
import ilamb3.dataset as dset
from ilamb3.analysis.base import ILAMBAnalysis  # import the ABC from ilamb
from ilamb3.exceptions import AnalysisNotAppropriate
from ilamb3.tests.test_run import generate_test_dset


class absrelerror(ILAMBAnalysis):  # define a class that inherits from the ABC
    def __init__(self, varname: str):
        self.varname = varname

    def __call__(
        self,
        reference: xr.Dataset,
        comparison: xr.Dataset,
    ) -> tuple[pd.DataFrame, xr.Dataset, xr.Dataset]:
        
        varname = self.varname

        if dset.is_site(reference[varname]) or dset.is_site(comparison[varname]):
            raise AnalysisNotAppropriate()

        # trim away non-overlapping time and ensure units/lon are consistent
        ref, com = cmp.make_comparable(reference, comparison, varname)

        # remove possible problems with calendars by using integrated time means
        if dset.is_temporal(ref[varname]):
            ref[varname] = dset.integrate_time(ref, varname, mean=True)
        if dset.is_temporal(com[varname]):
            com[varname] = dset.integrate_time(com, varname, mean=True)

        # nest the spatial grids as explained in Collier, et al., JAMES, 2018
        ref, com = cmp.nest_spatial_grids(ref, com)

        # compute an area-weighted mean
        eps_map = np.abs(ref[varname] - com[varname]) / np.abs(ref[varname])
        eps = dset.integrate_space(eps_map, varname, mean=True)

        # build up the output dataframe
        df = pd.DataFrame(
            [
                {
                    "source": "Comparison",
                    "region": "None",
                    "analysis": "Relative Error",
                    "name": "Mean Absolute Relative Error",
                    "type": "scalar",
                    "units": "1",
                    "value": float(eps),
                }
            ]
        )

        return df, xr.Dataset(), xr.Dataset()
```

Lines that were changed have been highlighted for emphasis. In words, the above code snippet makes the following changes:

- We have imported the abstract base class `ILAMBAnalysis` and made `absrelerror` a class that *inherits* from it.
- We created a member function named `__init__` and moved our `varname` argument to it. Python has a number of *double under* (a.k.a *dunder*) methods that have special behavior. The `__init__` method is called when an instance of the class is created, and it allows us to initialize the instance's attributes.
- Then, we created a member function named `__call__`, and we put the content from our function inside. The reference and comparison datasets are passed as arguments to this method---all analysis `__call__` methods follow this pattern. The `__call__` method will allow us to call an instance of the `absrelerror` class as if it were a function.

At the moment, it does not yet seem like we have accomplished much by this change. However, if you try to create an instance of this class we have built,

```python
my_analysis = absrelerror("tas")
```
you should see that python throws an error:
```
TypeError: Can't instantiate abstract class absrelerror without an implementation for abstract methods 'plots', 'required_variables'
```

The `ILAMBAnalysis` base class defines a template for all analysis functions. If you don't implement all of the methods we need, you can't even create an instance. You will see that the error message is complaining about not having an implementation for two functions. The second of these is `required_variables`, a function that returns a list of variables that the analysis needs in the input `Dataset`. So we add another member function that returns `varname` in a list. `ilamb3` will use this internally to query model data and prepare the input datasets for the analysis.

```python
    def required_variables(self):
        return [self.varname]
```

The other of these functions is `plots`, a function that generates plots for the analysis. For the moment, add the following implementation that returns an empty dataframe and we will return to this later.

```python
    def plots(
        self, df: pd.DataFrame, ref: xr.Dataset, com: dict[str, xr.Dataset], path: Path
    ) -> pd.DataFrame:
        return pd.DataFrame()
```

At this point your analysis function is ready to be integrated into `ilamb3`.

## Making `ilamb3` aware of your analysis function

When adding a analysis function, you can work in your own directory until you are ready to register it with the `ilamb3` system. To do this you will first need to clone the repository:

```bash
git clone git@github.com:rubisco-sfa/ilamb3.git
cd ilamb3
```

and then move the python file with your analysis function in it into the `ilamb3/analysis` directory:

```bash
mv my_function_file.py ilamb3/analysis/
```

Then you need to edit the `__init__.py` file found in this directory to make sure the system will know about your new analysis function. This should look something like this:

```python
from ilamb3.analysis.my_function_file import absrelerror  # noqa
```

Once you have imported your analysis function into the `__init__.py` file, the `ilamb3` system will register it in its list of analyses.
