---
kernelspec:
  name: python3
  display_name: 'Python 3'
---

# ILAMB Quickstart Guide

## Introduction

The Internaional Land Model Benchmarking (ILAMB) project is an on-going effort to systemically and holisitcally compare (a.k.a., "benchmark") Earth System Model predictions with reference data. Reference data could be site measurements, gridded satellite products, reanalysis products, or other types of observational data. The ILAMB software compares model to reference data using bias, RMSE, annual cycles, spatial distributions, and (optionally) variable-to-variable comparisons. To meaningfully interpret comparisons, users must be familiar with the methodologies we employ. So, we recommend that you first read our paper, [*Collier, et al. 2018*](https://doi.org/10.1029/2018MS001354), which details conmparison methodologies and provides our philosophy for how results should be used and interpreted.

Historically, ILAMB is most often used to assess biogeochemical cycles on land, but our methods and software are generic and can be applied to any domain. Below is a tutorial that will teach you the basic steps required to use the ILAMB software on any reference/model data comparisons of your choosing. You will learn how to:

1. Set up reference data
2. Set up model data
3. Run an ILAMB comparison & visualize the results in a dashboard

## Before you start

Before getting started, you should (1) [install the ilamb3 software](installation) and (2) have in mind a scientific question that you want to answer with your benchmarking study. This will help you decide which variables, datasets, and model outputs you want to use. For this tutorial, our scientific question is simple: *How well does the CanESM5 model predict gross primary productivity (GPP)?* ILAMB can handle broader, more complex questions, but we will start with this simple one to get familiar with the software.


## Reference Data

For this example, you must decide which *GPP* reference datasets you want to use. For your convenience, ILAMB has [registries of reference datasets](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/tree/main/ilamb3/registry) that have already been formatted for use in ILAMB. We have legacy registries for land and ocean variables (see the [ilamb land](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/registry/ilamb.txt) and [ilamb ocean](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/registry/iomb.txt) registries). We also have a new registry containing datasets that better adhere to comumunity data standards than our legacy datasets, [the ilamb3 registry](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/registry/ilamb3.txt). For this tutorial, we will use the `WECANN-1-0/obs4MIPs_ColumbiaU_WECANN-1-0_mon_gpp_gn_v20260302.nc` dataset from the `ilamb3` registry. This is a gridded product of GPP that was generated by Columbia University using the WECANN model and then formatted for use in ILAMB.

For ILAMB to know which data we want to use, we must add the path to it in a [yaml](https://yaml.org) file, which looks like this:

```{literalinclude} my_benchmark_study.yaml
:language: yaml
```

Using your preferred text editor, create a `yaml` file, e.g., `my_benchmark_study.yaml`, and copy/paste the contents above into it.

The `my_benchmark_study.yaml` file contains a nested set of dictionaries which are used to organize the benchmarking study. In this case, we call our top-level benchmarking category, `Ecosystem and Carbon Cycle`. Nested below it, we have a section for our variable, `Gross Primary Productivity`. Within `Gross Primary Productivity`, we have a section for our reference dataset, `WECANN-1-0`. You can organize your study in [any way you prefer](TODO) and name the sections whatever you like. The organization we use here keeps your study tidy and makes it easier to navigate the results dashboard. Plus, this layout makes it easy to add additional benchmarking categories, variables, and reference datasets. The organization you choose will be reflected in the output directory structure and the results dashboard that is generated at the end of the study.

At minimum, ILAMB needs to know more about the reference data within the `sources` section. In this section, we must provide the variable name, `gpp`, as well as the path to the dataset. Usually, the reference data are stored as [NetCDFs](https://www.unidata.ucar.edu/software/netcdf). The variable `gpp` should exist inside the NetCDF that you point to. We also (optionally) set the color palette of the spatial maps that will appear in our results dashboard by adding a key called `variable_cmap` and assigning its value as `Greens`. To see what other configuration options are possible, check out this [yaml configuration tutorial](configure_yaml). You can also get a sense of configuraton options by checking out the
[comprehensive ILAMB land benchmarking study](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/configure/ilamb.yaml) and/or the [comprehensive ILAMB ocean benchmarking study](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3/blob/main/ilamb3/configure/iomb.yaml) `yaml` files.

In the `sources` section, you can show ILAMB where your reference data lives in three different ways:

1. Using a key from one of the ILAMB data registries. To see what is currently available, check out our datasets [page](TODO).
2. Using an absolute path to a file on your system.
3. Using a path relative to the `ILAMB_ROOT` environment variable. `ILAMB_ROOT` is the path to the ilamb software root directory. If you [set the `ILAMB_ROOT` environment variable](todo), you can move your data around on your system and just update the `ILAMB_ROOT` as needed.

Once you're finished setting up your `yaml` file, you should ensure that the reference data you pointed to is downloaded and available on your system. In this example, we specified an item in the ilamb3 data registry: `WECANN-1-0/obs4MIPs_ColumbiaU_WECANN-1-0_mon_gpp_gn_v20260302.nc`. To download that data from the registry, open a terminal window and execute the following command:

```{code} bash
ilamb fetch my_benchmark_study.yaml
```

This will download any keys it finds that are not already downloaded. Using data from our registries is a great way for you to build benchmarking comparisons that are portable to other systems and shareable with your colleagues. If there are data that you want to use that are not in our registries, you can format the data to be ILAMB-ready and submit a pull request in our [ilamb3-data GitHub repository](https://github.com/rubisco-sfa/ilamb3-data). If approved, your data will be added to the public registry and made available for anyone to use in their benchmarking studies.

## Model Data

While we have written `ilamb3` hoping that the reference and model datafiles follow NetCDF [CF-Conventions](https://cf-convention.github.io/), it is technically not required. At minimum, data must be readable by `xarray` and have some spatiotemporal dimensions (e.g., latitude, longitude, time, etc.). We understand that, often, benchmarking is used early in model development and requires some flexibility as the model continues to develop.

Just like the reference data, you will need to tell `ilamb3` where your model data is located. Currently, ILAMB expects model data-related information stored in a tabular CSV file. Here is an example of what that CSV file should look like:

```{code-cell} python
:tags: [remove-input]
import pandas as pd
df = pd.read_csv("CanESM5.csv").drop(columns=["Unnamed: 0","mip_era","activity_id","institution_id","table_id"])
df
```

```{aside} Obtaining CMIP Data
If you want to benchmark model data outputted by CMIP models, you can use [intake-esgf](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.18378994) to query and download CMIP data. See this [tutorial](intake) that (1) queries and downloads CMIP model data using intake-esgf, and (2) uses **intake-esgf** results to create a CSV that ILAMB can read.
```

At minimum, the CSV file must:

1. Contain one row per unique variable/file. If you have a variable split into multiple files, as some CMIP models do, then you would still have a row per unique file. If your model data is closer to raw output where single files contain many variables, you would create a row for each unique variable and file even if you reference the same file multiple times.
2. Contain a `path` column which provides the absolute path to the file location on your system.
3. Contain the columns `source_id`, `member_id`, and `grid_label`, unless you have [configured](TODO) `ilamb3` otherwise. If you are using your own model data that has not been standardized, you may have to create these columns manually and fill with data you invent.

While generating these CSV files is up to the users to generate, we do have some functionality to assist if your model data follows expected patterns. For example:

```{code} bash
ilamb model-csv PATH_TO_MODEL_DATA FILENAME.csv --file-regex
```

## Running the study

We now have all the ingredients needed to run the test study:

```{code} bash
ilamb run my_benchmark_study.yaml --model-csv CanESM5.csv
```

Internally, `ilamb3` will use the benchmark definitions found in `my_benchmark_study.yaml` to query the model data given in `CanESM5.csv` for relevant variables. For each unique combination of `source_id`, `member_id`, and `grid_label`, we will run a comparison and save the results in the `_build` directory:

```{code} bash
_build/
├── EcosystemandCarbonCycle
│   └── GrossPrimaryProductivity
│       └── WECANN-1-0
│           ├── CanESM5.csv
│           ├── CanESM5.nc
│           ├── CanESM5_None_bias.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_biasscore.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_cycle.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_cyclescore.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_mean.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_rmse.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_rmsescore.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_shift.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_tmax.png
│           ├── CanESM5_None_trace.png
│           ├── None_None_taylor.png
│           ├── post.log
│           ├── Reference.nc
│           ├── Reference_None_mean.png
│           ├── Reference_None_tmax.png
│           └── WECANN-1-0.html
├── index.html
├── _lmtUDConfig.json
├── run.yaml
└── scalar_database.json
```

Let's unpack what `ilamb3 run` has outputted in the `_build` directory. We can see that the output has been stored in subdirectories that mirror the organization found in `my_benchmark_study.yaml`. `EcosystemandCarbonCycle/GrossPrimaryProductivity/WECANN-1-0` contains the benchmarking study results for `WECANN-1-0`. Within that directory, you will find the following files:
- As the `ilamb3` software runs, it writes out intermediate files:
  - `CanESM5.csv` stores all comparison scalars that were generated
  - `CanESM5.nc` contains the data used for the plots (the .pngs)
- `CanESM5.log` contains errors that occured during the run
4. Plots are generated following a naming convention of `{DATA}_{REGION}_{PLOT}.png`, where `{DATA}` is the model name or "Reference" for the reference data. If a plot is composited across all models, then `{DATA}` may appear as `None`
5. `post.log` contains errors that occured during the post-processing phase of the `ilamb3` run. The post-processing phase is ...
6. `WECANN-1-0.html` is the results dashboard that you can open in a browser. The page will look something like [this](https://www.ilamb.org/dev/Land/EcosystemandCarbonCycle/GrossPrimaryProductivity/WECANN-1-0/WECANN-1-0.html)

There are also several files located at the root of the `_build` directory. The file `run.yaml` is a copy of the benchmark configuration file. This is for reproducibility so that you can always tell what produced any given `ilamb3` build. The remaining files were produced as a meta analysis [what does meta analysis mean??](todo) of the full `ilamb3` run:

- `scalar_database.json` contains all the scalars that were generated across all comparisons and models. This file is used to create an interactive portrait plot in the results dashboard. The portrait plot allows you to see how each model performs across all benchmarks and how each benchmark performs across all models. You can use the portrait plot to identify which models are performing well and which benchmarks are driving model performance.
- `index.html` is the Unified Dashboard (what is that??) and references dashboard options `_lmtUDConfig.json`. Since the dashboard will load a data file, it will not work if you simply open `index.html` in a browser because it violates security policy. You need to either move it to a web-visible location or emulate an HTTP server locally with `python -m http.server` and then open the link that python provides.

```{warning} Unified Dashboard Meta Analysis Limitation
At the time of this writing, the unified dashboard meta analysis requires that the benchmarks be found in a 2-nested yaml (`EcosystemandCarbonCycle` and `GrossPrimaryProductivity`, in this case). While you are free to organize your benchmarks however you need, the meta analyses may have requirements that limit their applicability to your study.
```

## Visualizing the study results

You can open the `WECANN-1-0.html` file in a browser to view the results dashboard. Navigate to the `_build` directory and, in your terminal, run:

```bash
python -m http.server 8000
```

This dashboard is designed to assist you in discovering patterns in the results. It contains a series of plots that are generated for each model and reference dataset. The plots include bias maps, RMSE maps, Taylor diagrams, time series of annual cycles, and more. Each plot is designed to highlight different aspects of the model performance. For example, bias maps show where the model is overestimating or underestimating GPP compared to the reference data, while Taylor diagrams show how well the model captures the spatial patterns of GPP.

... Continue to walk through the results dashboard. You bring up terms like "unified dashboard", "portrait plot", "spatial maps", etc. and don't explain them. I wouldn't mention them in the basic tutorial without showing/defining terms like that.

## Next steps

In order to solidify these basic `ilamb3` concepts, we recommend that you attempt the following expansions on your own:

1. **Add another model:** This consists of creating another (or expanding the current) CSV file. To keep downloads small, you might choose to add `UKESM1-0-LL` because it is also relatively coarse like CanESM5. If you create a second CSV file, when running `ilamb3`, you can just add it to the `--model-csv` option separated by a comma. We will concatenate these files together internally:
```{code} bash
ilamb run basic_step1.yaml --model-csv CanESM5.csv,UKESM1-0-LL.csv
```
2. **Add another benchmark:** Locate the `ilamb3` registry key for the `Fluxnet-2015` `gpp` data from the [datasets](datasets) page. Add another benchmark block to `my_benchmark_study.yaml` which is also under the `Gross Primary Productivity` heading. Essentially, you need to duplicate the `WECANN-1-0` block and then replace the WECANN-specific information with Fluxnet2015-specific information.
